Incidence of Opportunities for Improvement - Study Plan
================

## Introduction

Background

Defined as physical injury and the body’s associated response (Gerdin
2015), trauma is one of the primary causes for mortality and morbidity
throughout the world.\[[1](#ref-GlobalStats)\] It is estimated to claim
the lives of several million annually and constitutes a massive burden
on the global economy. \[[1](#ref-GlobalStats)\] For every death by
trauma, three patients are rendered permanently
disabled\[[2](#ref-Trauma)\], which significantly amplifies its social
and economic impact as well as the importance of quality trauma care.

Approximately half of all deaths attributable to trauma occur within
minutes of the initial injury\[[2](#ref-Trauma)\], making primary
prevention the most effective way to significantly adress mortality and
morbidity. The second half however, often due to neurological
dysfunction or sepsis, occurs later\[[2](#ref-Trauma)\], and the quality
of early trauma care is therefore of the utmost importance. As
demonstrated by the data comparing mortality before and after the
widespread introduction of the Advanced Trauma Life Support (ATLS)
method for rapid initial evaluation, those secondary deaths can to a
point, be prevented \[[3](#ref-ATLS)\].

Two pillars of trauma quality improvement are benchmarking of outcomes
and multidisciplinary mortality and morbidity reviews. \[x\]Benchmarking
of outcomes is often done by comparing outcomes between or within
centers across the trauma patient cohorts blunt multisystem,
penetrating, shock, severe traumatic brain injury, and elderly. The
multidisciplinary mortality and morbidity review aims to identify
opportunities for improvement and implement corrective actions.\[x\]

While much is known about mortality outcomes between the trauma cohorts,
little research has been conducted on how the incidence of opportunities
for improvement varies across these cohorts. As we strive to improve the
quality of our trauma care, this an important gap in knowledge that
needs to be adressed. We will argue that it is plausible to assume that
the number of opportunities for improvements may vary between cohorts
and that the result could give us a hint on where to focus our limited
resources.

Aims

The overarching aim of this study is to further investigate the quality
of the early trauma care at Karolinska University Hospital trauma
center. The specific aim of this study is to estimate the incidence of
opportunities for improvement in trauma patient care at Karolinska
University Hospital between cohorts and plot it as a function over time.

## Methods

Study design

An institutional retrospective cohort study will be conducted, using
data from two entities: the Karolinska University Hospital trauma
registry and trauma care quality database. The databases will be linked,
and an algorithm will be used in order to process their data. The
patients will then be divided into six cohorts determined by trauma
category and the incidence of ‘opportunities for improvement,’ a
dichotomous proxy measure for suboptimal care, will be estimated and
plotted as a function of time. Thereafter the incidence will be compared
between cohorts.

Setting

Karolinska University Hospital is the leading trauma care center in
Stockholm, Sweden and where the majority of the severe trauma cases are
processed. There are a number of smaller trauma hospitals in the
Stockholm area, but KUH is the only one which could be compared to a
level one trauma center, though it lacks formal verification by American
College of Surgeons as of yet. \[x\] Trauma patients are tagged in a
pre-hospital setting as a priority one or two, by assessing vital
physiological parameters and anatomic criteria. The physiological
parameters are systolic BP (\<90 mmHg), respiratory rate (\<10 or \>29)
and Glasgow Coma Scale grading for impaired consciousness (\<14). An
anatomic criterion could be an unstable or deformed
chest.\[[4](#ref-Traumateam)\]

If tagged as a priority one trauma, the injuries are considered directly
life threatening and the patient in need of a full trauma team and
referred to the KUH trauma center. At arrival, they are taken to the
trauma room where they are met by a surgeon who assumes the role as
trauma leader, an anesthesiologist, an orthopedist, a radiologist, a
nurse anesthetist, an emergency medicine nurse, an emergency medicine
assistant nurse, a surgical nurse, an assistant surgical nurse and a
radiology specialist nurse. A primary survey is then conducted following
the ATLS method for initial rapid evaluation and the next course of
action is decided upon. \[[4](#ref-Traumateam)\] \[Granström 2018\]

All patient treated at Karolinska University Hospital and required
trauma team activation or retrospectively were found to have injuries
corresponding to an NISS severity score of 15 or greater, since 2012
(n>21,000) are included in the hospitals trauma registry. This includes
patients transferred to the hospital within 7 days of an injury
corresponding to a NISS (New Injury Severity Score, a validated model
for grading of trauma severity) grading of \<15. The registry is
comprehensive and contains information about prehospital type of
transport, prehospital vital parameters, type of injury, vital
parameters at arrival, intention of injury, important lab values and
much more data points pertaining to the same category.

Follow up is conducted after 30 days and registers survival, days in
ventilator, GCS at discharge, highest level of care received, location
of discharge, if there were a transfer to another unit of care and if
there was an autopsy performed. The Karolinska care quality database
contains a subset of those patient cases, selected for multidisciplinary
mortality and morbidity review, since 2014 (n>2,200). In each of the
patient cases discussed, one question is posed and documented, namely:
was there an opportunity for improvement in the care of this patient?

Participants

Since our study aims to investigate the trauma care at Karolinska
University Hospital, all patients in the Karolinska trauma and
Karolinska trauma care quality registries were deemed eligible for
inclusion, as they are an exact match for the population which the
results of our study will be applicable. They were then grouped into one
of the following cohorts: blunt, multisystem, penetrating, shock, severe
traumatic brain injury, and elderly.

Variables

As the primary outcome measure, the dichotomous variable “opportunity
for improvement” (yes/no), as defined in the trauma care quality
registry, is used. An opportunity for improvement was considered to
apply if the multidisciplinary review board deemed it so, discussed more
below.

Potential effect modifiers

There is a possibility that patients who would otherwise be
characterized as trauma patients retrospectively, namely those who did
not initiate trauma team activation, but satisfied the NISS scoring
criteria, were subject to systematic mis- or underdiagnosis and not
included in the registries as a result. As such, they may have been
undertreated and may, as a group, have a lower true incidence of
opportunities for improvement, then the reported one.

Data sources/measurement

The answer ‘yes’ or ‘no’ to the dichotomous variable ‘opportunities for
improvement’ found in the Karolinska trauma care quality database was
contingent on the consensus of the discussion in the multidisciplinary
review board meeting. For each case, the attending physicians and nurse
made a decision based on certain guiding questions, e.g.: “Were the
material resources available appropriate for the type and severity of
the injuries?” or “Were there enough physicians, nurses, assistant
nurses etc?”

Jag har haft svårt att hitta den exakta mallen som används för att
vägleda dessa beslut. Tar gärna emot tips om hur jag hittar den.

Bias

The method and algorithm for data analysis will be developed on a
step-by-step basis using simulated data. It will be rigorously tested
throughout its development process, until the results using the
simulated data set is deemed satisfactory. When that is the case, the
algorithm will be reviewed by a trained programmer and statistician.
After approval by the programmer and statistician, the algorithm will
not be changed, and the data, as a result, will not be skewed by the
bias of the developer.

Study size

The objective of this study is to further examine the patient care at
Karolinska University Hospital trauma center. The collections of data
most applicable to our chosen study population are the Karolinska trauma
registry and trauma care quality database, which is why they were chosen
as our primary source of data. The Karolinska trauma registry contains
information about roughly 21,000 patients, 2,200 of which are also
included in the Karolinska trauma care quality registry.

Quantitative variables

The incidence of opportunities for improvement will be calculated in
each of the cohorts. A linear progression model will then be applied to
the data, in order to plot the incidence as a function over time.

Statistical methods

Jag är inte helt säker på det specifika gällande de statistiska metoder
som jag kommer att använda. Är det möjligt att diskutera på
handledarmötet på tisdag, alternativt få några pointers i samband med
skriftlig feedback på Github? Jag håller på att jobba en del med
referenserna och texten i övrigt, men jag ville se till att något
laddades upp idag så att det finns tid för granskning.

<div id="refs" class="references csl-bib-body">

<div id="ref-GlobalStats" class="csl-entry">

1\. Wang H, Naghavi M, Allen C, Barber RM, Bhutta ZA, Carter A, et al.
Global, regional, and national life expectancy, all-cause mortality, and
cause-specific mortality for 249 causes of death, 19802015: A systematic
analysis for the global burden of disease study 2015. The Lancet.
2016;388:1459–544.

</div>

<div id="ref-Trauma" class="csl-entry">

2\. Maerz LL, Davis KA, Rosenbaum SH. Trauma. International
Anesthesiology Clinics. 2009;47:25–36.

</div>

<div id="ref-ATLS" class="csl-entry">

3\. Gustafson P. <span class="nocase">\[ATLS – tragedy turned to
international success\]</span>. Lakartidningen. 2016;113.

</div>

<div id="ref-Traumateam" class="csl-entry">

4\. Granström A, Wihlke G, Brattström O, Ostlund A. <span
class="nocase">\[Activation of the trauma team is related to injury
severity. Triage stringency can yield optimal use of resources\]</span>.
Lakartidningen. 2012;109:154–7.

</div>

</div>
