Timeline masters thesis - Elias Joneborg
================

Week 1

Create a GitHub account. Create a project specific repository and name
it something appropriate (GOOD: predict-preventable-deaths, BAD:
Master-thesis). Install R, RStudio and try Swirl. Join the team on Slack
and say hello. Check out Johanna Bergâ€™s student demo and learn how to
integrate RStudio and GitHub. Subscribe your project specific channel on
Slack to changes in your GitHub repository by typing github subscribe
<your_github_username>/<your_github_repository> (you need to replace
<your_github_username> and <your_github_repository> with their actual
names, for example github subscribe martingerdin/student-kit). That way
everyone involved in your project will receive notifications when you
push edits to GitHub. Read up. Draft a detailed timeline with dates and
deliveries and upload to your project repository. Draft a study plan
based on the appropriate study reporting guideline, for example STROBE
or TRIPOD, and upload to your project repository.

Week 2

Revise your study plan based on feedback. Read up. Start devising your
study plan into a format fit for publication, which in turn can be
expanded into the semester essay.

Week 3

Start writing code and upload a first script that imports and begin to
clean the data. Draft and upload the progress report, which is due, at
the latest, monday Week 4. PU workshop on tuesday. Read up. Start
expanding your study plan into the project paper.

Week 4

Revise code based on feedback. Add code that creates a first table of
sample characteristics. Revise progress report based on feedback and
submit. Read up. Work on your project paper.

Week 5-10

Write code that generate a first set of preliminary results and revise
weekly based on feedback. Project seminars 22-23 feb Work on your
project paper.

Week 11-12

Draft the Results section and upload. Revise code based on feedback.
Work on your project paper.

Week 13-14

Draft Discussion section and upload. Revise Results based on feedback.
Work on your project paper.

Week 15

Draft and upload final project paper.

Week 16

Revise final project paper and upload a second version.

Week 17

Revise second version of final project paper and submit.

Week 18-20

Revise project paper based on comments and feedback from peers, course
leaders, examiners, and me

Important dates not yet specified:

may 9th: deadline for uploading first draft of your project paper

may 18-20th: examination seminars, (presentation and opposition)

may 30th: deadline for uploading final draft
